Jeffrey nice is a human rights Barrister
who led the prosecution of former
Serbian leader Slobodan mosovich at the
un's international criminal Tribunal for
the former Yugoslavia he joins us live
now from Canterbury in the United
Kingdom good to have you with us so
looking through the statements we heard
from councils to South Africa there were
references to additional measures there
are references to Israel failing to
abide by previous provisional orders
what exactly if you could summarize for
us is South Africa then asking the court
to do
now one of your earlier
contributors uh made the point that
occurred to me to begin with South
Africa allowed for those who might have
doubts about Israel's
intention not to be too horrified by the
order that was event
obtain and that order did not order the
cessation of fighting it ordered
protection of the Gaza people in respect
of their right not to suffer
genocide but you will have noticed that
this time the language is much much
stronger not only in that it demands an
end immediately and withdrawal of
fighting forces but it asserts quite
clearly that that there is genocidal
intent on the part of Israel the desire
to see off gazan citizens
altogether and by having waited some
time before it puts this argument at the
top of its case it has shown respect to
the court and to some degree extent
respect even to Israel given what Israel
undoubtedly suffered on the 7th of
October but now it is making it quite
clear that which many other commentators
have felt has been the case namely that
there's evidence that Israel really has
genocidal intent to destroy the gazan
people in Gaza alog together that's a
big change now it's a big change so
Jeffrey if I could jump in it is
basically does this mean that if the icj
rules in favor of South Africa's
pleading at this point that it would be
basically agreeing that there is
genocidal intent and it would be
ordering an end to the entire war in
Gaza is that
right it won't do the first thing
because it can't make a determination of
genocide really until all the evidence
is heard at the end of the overall
case but what it may do is identify a
far stronger risk of genocide against
which it needs to give its protection
and it may say the only only way it can
give its protection is by granting the
protective measures that South Africa
repeats and asks for and what's
interesting of course is that as things
develop over
time desperately sad that it has to
happen that way tragic that it has to
happen that way where lives are lost in
the intervening period but if it does
that then it's actually to some extent
in step with the changing political
approach not least by the United States
of America but also other countries who
are saying that the attack on Rafa
should not go ahead saying that arms
should not be used for Attack on Rafa
and so on and so forth that that's an
important that's an important point I
want to jump in again though and get in
on something you mentioned if if the
court cannot make that finding of
genocidal intent obviously or one
assumes that it's got to wait for the
major case to be finalized the main case
to be finalized what was the value of
South Africa
introducing that in its pleading today
is it to build up the grounds slowly
towards that finding of genocidal
intent I think it's both that of course
but it's also to establish evidence in
the words of those who it says has
spoken with genocidal in inent to
justify the protective measures to say
as a result of what you've heard seen
and observed on the footage or pictures
you can now be sure that the risk of the
gazen people suffering genocide is
really great and therefore you must do
more and what you must do is this I
thought there was also a very
interesting cont element from one of the
speaker one of the council I can't
remember which one who spoke
the desire of some countries to have
things resolved politically in the
security Council rather than by
law that approach is one that I think
the general public who are informed
about these matters would find deeply
concerning and
distasteful it is politicians for
decades in the security Council and
around the world who bear responsibility
for what has happened here what has
happened here was foreseeable from the
beginning of the 20th century when the
first developments towards the creation
of the state of Israel were taking place
everybody knew how things might end and
it needed real clever International
political Goodwill and action to save
what has happened from happening so the
idea that this law which was introduced
the genocide convention to save people
from the sort of thing that it is said
is now happening should be overridden by
The Works of politicians when it is they
who bear responsibility for what is
happening is a pretty tall order isn't
it and I think the public now who are
becoming increasingly well aware of the
law and how it interacts with countries
that choose to go to war I think the
public will now begin to see they would
rather the law worked than that the
politicians did not work I think there's
uh plenty of sentiment around the world
that would probably agree with uh the
idea that there's doubt in politicians
certainly ultimately Jeffrey do you
think it's likely this court is going to
Grant South Africa's request will it
order an end to the
war I prefer not to second guess what
the Court decides that I'm not the judge
they are but I think it's worth having
in mind as we wait for their decision
that if they don't Grant the
request then it will be seen by Israel
as a green light to do that which many
countries around the world want them not
to do so to the extent that the
international court of justice is
politically sensitive and of course it
is all International courts are
particularly sensitive and sometimes
subject to Poli political influence to
the extent that it's politically
sensitive it may be rather easier for it
to do that which South Africa wants now
than it would have been five months
ago all right thank you so much for your
analysis of these proceedings oral
statements being made today Jeffrey nice
there make sure to subscribe to our
channel to get the latest news from Al
jazer